# Alerting

The [prometheus.io docs](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/overview/)
describe the overall alerting process:

> Alerting with Prometheus is separated into two parts. Alerting rules in
> Prometheus servers send alerts to an Alertmanager. The Alertmanager then
> manages those alerts, including silencing, inhibition, aggregation and
> sending out notifications via methods such as email, on-call notification
> systems, and chat platforms.

The general Prometheus configuration is described in
[monitoring-and-logging.md](./monitoring-and-logging.md#defaults-3) - note that
section specifies some role variables which commonly need modification.

The alertmanager server is deployed by the [prometheus-community/Ansible collection](https://github.com/stackhpc/prometheus-community-ansible),
(fork with small tweaks) and all the configuration options and defaults are defined there.
Also see `environments/common/inventory/group_vars/all/alertmanager.yml` for our configuration template.
The defaults are fully functional, except that a [receiver](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/configuration/#receiver)
must be configured to generate notifications.

## Enabling alertmanager

1. Ensure both the `prometheus` and `alertmanager` servers are deployed on the
   control node - these are deployed by default in the site environment's groups:

```ini
# environments/site/groups:
[prometheus:children]
control
[alertmanager:children]
control
```

2. If the appliance was deployed before the alertmanager functionality was included, generate a password for the alertmanager UI user:

```shell
ansible-playbook ansible/adhoc/generate-passwords.yml
```

3. Configure a receiver to generate notifications from alerts. Currently a Slack
   integration is provided (see below) but alternative receivers could be defined
   via overriding role defaults.

4. If desired, any other [role](https://github.com/stackhpc/prometheus-community-ansible/blob/stackhpc/roles/alertmanager/README.md)
   and [common](#common-variable-reference) defaults may be overridden in e.g. `environments/site/inventory/group_vars/all/alertmanager.yml`.

5. Run the `monitoring.yml` playbook (if the cluster is already up) to configure
   both alertmanager and prometheus:

```shell
ansible-playbook ansible/monitoring.yml
```

## Access

There is a web interface provided by the alertmanager server. The default
address can be seen using:

```shell
ansible localhost -m debug -a var=alertmanager_web_external_url
```

The user is `alertmanager` and the autogenerated password can be seen using:

```shell
ansible localhost -m debug -a var=vault_alertmanager_admin_password
```

## Slack receiver

This section describes how to enable the Slack receiver to provide notifications
of alerts via Slack.

1. Create an app with a bot token:

- Go to <https://api.slack.com/apps>
- select "Create an App"
- select "From scratch"
- Set app name and workspace fields, select "Create"
- Fill out "Short description" and "Background color" fields, select "Save changes"
- Select "OAuth & Permissions" on left menu
- Under "Scopes : Bot Token Scopes", select "Add an OAuth Scope", add
  `chat:write` and select "Save changes"
- Select "Install App" on left menu, select "Install to your-workspace", select Allow
- Copy the Bot User OAuth token shown

2. Add the bot token into the config and enable Slack integration:

- Open `environments/$ENV/inventory/group_vars/all/vault_alertmanager.yml`
- Uncomment `vault_alertmanager_slack_integration_app_creds` and add the token
- Vault-encrypt that file:

```shell
ansible-vault encrypt environments/$ENV/inventory/group_vars/all/vault_alertmanager.yml
```

- Open `environments/$ENV/inventory/group_vars/all/alertmanager.yml`
- Uncomment the `alertmanager_slack_integration` mapping and set your alert channel name

3. Invite the bot to your alerts channel

- In the appropriate Slack channel type:

```text
/invite @YOUR_BOT_NAME
```

## Alerting Rules

These are part of [Prometheus configuration](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/alerting_rules/)
which is defined for the appliance at
[environments/common/inventory/group_vars/all/prometheus.yml](../environments/common/inventory/group_vars/all/prometheus.yml).

Two [prometheus.prometheus.prometheus](https://github.com/stackhpc/prometheus-community-ansible/tree/stackhpc/roles/prometheus)
role variables are relevant:

- `prometheus_alert_rules_files`: Paths to check for files providing rules.
  Note these are copied to Prometheus config directly, so jinja expressions for
  Prometheus do not need escaping.
- `prometheus_alert_rules`: Yaml-format rules. Jinja templating here will be
  interpolated by Ansible, so templating intended for Prometheus must be escaped
  using `{% raw %}`/`{% endraw %}` tags.

By default, `prometheus_alert_rules_files` is set so that any `*.rules` files
in a directory `files/prometheus/rules` in the current environment or _any_
parent environment are loaded. So usually, site-specific alerts should be added
by creating additional rules files in `environments/site/files/prometheus/rules`.
If the same file exists in more than one environment, the "child" file will take
precedence and any rules in the "parent" file will be ignored.

A set of default alert rule files is provided at `environments/common/files/prometheus/rules/`.
These cover:

- Some node-exporter metrics for disk, filesystems, memory and clock. Note
  no alerts are triggered on memory for compute nodes due to the intended use
  of those nodes.
- Slurm nodes in DOWN or FAIL states, or the Slurm DBD message queue being too
  large, usually indicating a database problem.

When defining additional rules, note the [labels defined](./monitoring-and-logging.md#prometheus_node_exporter_targets) for node-exporter targets.

In future more alerts may be added for:

- smartctl-exporter-based rules for baremetal nodes where there is no
  infrastructure-level smart monitoring
- loss of "up" network interfaces

## Common variable reference

We provide some guidance on customization based on `environments/common/inventory/group_vars/all/alertmanager.yml`.

All variables are optional. See [prometheus.prometheus.alertmanager](https://github.com/stackhpc/prometheus-community-ansible/blob/stackhpc/roles/alertmanager/defaults/main.yml)
and environments/common/inventory/group_vars/all/alertmanager.yml for all default values.

General variables:

- `alertmanager_version`: String, version (no leading 'v')
- `alertmanager_checksum`: String, **sha256** checksum for relevant version from
  [GitHub releases](https://github.com/prometheus/alertmanager/releases), in format
  `value`.
- `alertmanager_port`: Port to listen on.

- `alertmanager_web_external_url`: String, the URL under which Alertmanager is
  externally reachable - defaults to host IP address and `alertmanager_port`.
  See man page for more details if proxying alertmanager.
- `alertmanager_data_retention`: String, how long to keep data for
- `alertmanager_data_maintenance_interval`: String, interval between garbage
  collection and snapshotting to disk of the silences and the notification logs.

The following variables are templated into the alertmanager [main configuration](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/configuration/):

- `alertmanager_receivers`: A list of [receiver](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/)
  mappings to define under the top-level `receivers` configuration key. This
  will contain the Slack receiver if that has been enabled (see below).
- `alertmanager_extra_receivers`: A list of additional [receiver](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/),
  mappings to add, by default empty.
- `alertmanager_slack_receiver`: Mapping defining the [Slack receiver](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/configuration/#slack_config). Note the default configuration for this is in
  `environments/common/inventory/group_vars/all/alertmanager.yml`.
- `alertmanager_slack_receiver_name`: String, name for the above Slack receiver.
- `alertmanager_slack_receiver_send_resolved`: Bool, whether to send resolved alerts via the above Slack receiver.
- `alertmanager_null_receiver`: Mapping defining a `null` [receiver](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/configuration/#receiver) so a receiver is always defined.
- `asa_alertmanager_child_routes`: a list of [routes](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/configuration/#route-related-settings)
  that will be put under the default route.

Additional customization can be achieved by variables from `prometheus.prometheus.alertmanager`:

SMTP settings:

```yaml
alertmanager_smtp:
  from: smtp.example.org:587
```

Time intervals:

```yaml
alertmanager_time_intervals:
  - name: monday-to-friday
      time_intervals:
      - weekdays: ['monday:friday']
```

The following variables are templated into the alertmanager [web configuration](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/https/):

- `alertmanager_web_config_default`: Mapping with default configuration for
  `basic_auth_users` providing the default web user.
- `alertmanager_alertmanager_web_config_extra`: Mapping with additional web
  configuration. Keys in this become top-level keys in the web configuration.
